.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" Copyright (c) 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004 Sandro Sigala.
.\" Copyright (c) 2005, 2007 Reuben Thomas.
.\" Copying and distribution of this file, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted in any medium without royalty
.\" provided the copyright notice and this notice are preserved.
.Dd Aug, 2008
.Os
.Dt ZILE 1
.Sh NAME
.Nm zile
.Nd Zile Is Lossy Emacs
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm zile
.Op OPTION...
.Op FILE...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm Zile
is a lightweight Emacs clone that provides a subset of Emacs's
functionality suitable for basic editing. It should run on any POSIX
system with ncurses. For more complete documentation, see the Info
manual (`info zile').
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Ar +NUMBER
Go to line \fINUMBER\fR in the next file opened.
.It Fl -help
Display a help message and exit.
.It Fl -no-init-file, q
Do not load an init file.
.It Fl -version
Display version information and exit.
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
Zile returns 0 on successful termination, 1 if it cannot start up, for
example because of an invalid command-line argument, and 2 if it
crashes or runs out of memory.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Fl
.It Pa ~/.zile
user's Zile init file
.El
.Sh BUGS
Please report bugs to \fBbug-zile@gnu.org\fR.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr emacs 1
.Sh AUTHORS
Sandro Sigala <sandro@sigala.it>
.br
Reuben Thomas <rrt@sc3d.org>
.br
David A. Capello <dacap@users.sourceforge.net>
.br
Scott Lawrence <yorgle@gmail.com>
